###############
Legal Documents
###############

Upon registering an account on PECE, user agreement documents are displayed to
the user who has to read and agree with them, marking a check-box, before
being allowed to continue registering for an account.


User Agreement
--------------

The Platform for Collaborative and Experimental Ethnography (PECE), hereby
represented by the PECE Team (see "Team-members-list"), is a web platform for
collaborative work around the tasks of archival, analysis, sharing, and
publication of ethnographic data. By using PECE, you accept the following terms
and conditions, including those in our code of conduct and privacy policy
documents. If you do not accept these terms, please refrain from using our
platform. PECE is licensed under the GNU General Public License (GPL) version
3. The platform is based on the Drupal framework which is licensed under the
General Public License (GPL) version 2 or later, including its contributed
modules. Other third-party software included in Drupal and PECE is licensed
under compatible Free Software licenses, which are included in our source code
repository for public access.

PECE was created to promote Open Access, Open Data, and Open Standards in the
humanities and social sciences. In order to achieve this goal, all of our
generated content is licensed under the "Creative Commons
Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International"" by default unless otherwise noted for
specific pieces of content. Users are responsible for describing the license
they want for their own content (or the license chosen by the copyright owner
for collected materials, if the content is being uploaded by a contributor not
the original author).

All uploaded content is the sole responsibility of the person who published it.
The PECE team is not responsible for the content posted by users of the
platform and cannot monitor all the published content. Authenticated
researchers and contributors are responsible for the content they upload to the
platform, as well as for its usage. They are also responsible for anonymizing
the ethnographic data they upload to the platform if the data carries any
potential privacy issue. PECE comes with no warranty or guarantee of fitness
for any particular use as described by its software license, GPL v.3. There are
no restrictions for its use, copy, study, modification, or redistribution as
described in the GPL v.3 license. We make no warranty as to the reliability,
accessibility, or quality of our web services. When using the platform you
agree that the usage of our services is at your sole and exclusive risk. The
PECE team is not liable for any direct, indirect, incidental, consequential, or
exemplary damages, including but not limited to harm and damage to research
participants of any kind and in the context of any research project making
usage of the platform. We worked to minimize the security risks of the
platform, but we cannot guarantee the complete security, anonymity, and
confidentiality of data posted on the platform.

When in doubt regarding the privacy and ethical implications of a particular
piece of data, please refrain from uploading it to the web. Always contact your
research co-participants and your IRB committee.


Privacy Policy
--------------

PECE does not collect nor store any data on its users, except for the personal
data that is given by the users themselves when creating profiles
(“registration information”).

In order to achieve its mission of promoting collaborative work among
researchers in humanities and social sciences, PECE privileges open data and
open standards. It follows closely the best practices of Free and Open Source
communities when dealing with privacy and security concerns. Open and full
disclosure of any security problem is our responsibility. Following the Free
and Open Source community practice, we do not hide technical problems from our
users.

When designing and implementing software for our platform, we prioritized our
research participants' right to anonymity, confidentiality, and privacy. PECE
users (in the major roles of collaborators and researchers) are responsible for
specifying the permission settings for every piece of content they upload. That
is, if a piece of data will be public (accessible to anyone) or private (only
accessible to the registered researchers, PECE researchers (with IRB approval)
or collaborators and Internet anonymous users).

PECE was designed in accordance to the ethical guidelines of professional
anthropological associations, such as the American Anthropological Association
(AAA), Associação Brasileira de Antropologia (ABA) and the World Council of
Anthropological Associations (WCAA). We follow the core ethical principles of
protecting our research participants' rights to privacy, anonymity, and
confidentiality. We aim to cause no harm to research participants or to any
social group directly or indirectly as a consequence of research work in our
platform. We subordinate our research goals to the ethical concerns and privacy
needs of our research participants. Our goal is to encourage wider data sharing
while protecting privacy and sharing of research data.   PECE will be used for
academic research and dissemination of data and research results in
collaboration with other researchers and academic collaborators: data
contributed by researchers and contributors will be controlled by themselves
with permission settings they must specify during data entry. We do not collect
nor share users' data, browser fingerprints, nor do we read, collect, or
analyze communication between users.

We reserve the right to change this policy at any time. If we make changes, we
will notify our users in a clear and prominent manner.


Licenses
--------

All the Drupal extensions we created are licensed under the `General Public
License, version 3 <https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.txt>`_.  All the
documentation for the PECE platform is released under the `Creative Commons 4.0
attribution-sharealike international license <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0>`_
unless marked by the authors otherwise.
