Essays
======
### What is the difference between a memo, a photo essay, and a PECE essay?

A memo is a first draft of a piece of writing that may be published on
the site. Upon publishing a memo, that memo is opened for comments from
the platform’s community.

A photo essay is a collection of image artifacts, ordered into a
slideshow, with text added for context. For an example of a photo essay,
see [here](http://theasthmafiles.org/content/6-united-states-environmental-health-governance-timeline)

A PECE essay is a collection of artifacts, memos, and essays, organized
into a collage, with text added for context. For an example of a PECE
essay, see [here](https://disaster-sts-network.org/content/lead-poisoning-and-information-distribution-southern-california/essay)

### How do I create a memo?

Navigate to your ‘Dashboard’. This link will be listed in the main menu.
Under the ‘Add Content’ heading, select ‘Memo’. You will be directed to
a web form to create the content. Enter the relevant fields (explained
in other parts of this document). Save the content.

### How do I create a photo essay?
For an overview of how to create photo essays, see this YouTube video.
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/Z2K9nrp4j74" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Navigate to your ‘Dashboard’. This link will be listed in the main menu.
Under the ‘Add Content’ heading, select ‘Photo Essay’. You will be
directed to a web form to create the content.

In the ‘image artifact’ field, begin typing the name of the artifact you
would like to link into the photo essay. In the ‘text’ field, enter the
essay text that you wish to display with the image artifact. Click the
‘Create Item’ button. ![](media/addphotoessay.png)

To add another photo essay slide, click the ‘Add New Item’ button. Once
done, fill out the remaining fields (explained in other parts of this
document), and save the content.

For an overview of how to create photo essays, see [*this YouTube video*](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z2K9nrp4j74).

### How do I reorder photos in a photo essay?

Once you’ve created photo essay items, you can reorder photos by
clicking and holding on the ‘+’ symbol next to the item and dragging the
item to a new order.

![](media/reorderimages.png)

### How do I create a PECE essay?

Navigate to your ‘Dashboard’. This link will be listed in the main menu.
Under the ‘Add Content’ heading, select ‘PECE Essay’. You will be
directed to a web form to create the content. Enter the relevant fields.
Save the content. This first step will only capture the metadata for the
essay.

To design the essay, navigate to the essay page you just created and
click ‘View Essay’. At the bottom of the screen there will be a black
bar that says ‘Customize this page’. Click this button to begin to the
customize the page.

To add content to the page, click the ‘+’ button in the blue ‘Content’
box. From this screen, you can add image files (not artifacts; just the
images), maps, free text, content (artifact, annotations, memos, and
essays) stored elsewhere on the platform, and headers for specific
portions of the essay. To add content stored elsewhere on the platform,
click the ‘Add Content’ button, begin typing the title of the content,
and select the appropriate content from the drop-down list. Select a
view mode from the drop-down menu below. A preview of how the content
will be rendered will appear on the right of the screen. Click Save.

To reorder content on the page, after you’ve clicked the ‘Customize this
page’ button, you can click and hold on content boxes and drag them to
new locations.

Once you’re done creating your essay, click the ‘Save’ button in the
black box at the bottom of the page.

For an overview of how to create PECE essays, see this YouTube video.

### How do I comment on publications?

Navigate to the memo, photo essay, or PECE Essay that you would like to
comment on. As long as you are logged in, you will see a heading to ‘Add
New Comment’ on the bottom of the page. Enter a subject, a comment, and
click ‘Save’.

![](media/comment.png)
